---
title: 'Automation in 1955'
updated: 	2018-08-09T17:47:22-05:00
---

Introduction
============

In 2018, automation is a concept in disarray.

When the term \"automation\" was introduced in 1940s by Delmar Harder,
an executive at Ford Motor Company, its meaning was clear enough. Where
before automobile engines had been manufactured by workers transferring
parts between various metal-working machines manually, Harder and his
subordinates in the \"Automation Department\" were evaluating where
machines could be introduced into the process to move parts from machine
to machine without a worker hefting them[^1].

By the mid-1950s, \"automation\" was no longer a term of art. In the
popular press, it had become dramatically more capacious, very nearly a
label for technological change as such.

I intend to take a critical look at the various meanings of
\"automation\" as it is used today, particularly in the political
discourse around basic income, \"bullshit jobs\", \"precarity\", and so
forth.

But before doing so I thought it would be helpful to make more widely
available some primary source materials that have helped me think
through what I find so dissatisfying about commentary on automation.

In 1955, a congressional subcomittee held [a series of hearings on
\"Automation and Technological
Change\"](https://archive.org/details/congress-automation-and-technological-change).
Among those invited to testify were executives of major manufacturing
and consulting firms, scientists, engineers, economists, and labor
leaders (most notably Walter Reuther). Many offered definitions of
\"automation\" which I\'ve excerpted below[^2].

These definitions provide a useful snapshot of expert views during the
first wave of anglophone automation discourse. Surprisingly
little has changed since.

Definitions
===========

John Diebold: President, John Diebold & Associates
--------------------------------------------------

We have heard automation characterized variously as a potential threat
to the national economy; as a key to increased leisure opportunity; as a
mystical pseudoscience of robots and giant brains; and as a
press-agent\'s description of automatic operation, from the kitchen
toaster to the subway turnstile... As you have said, automation is
certainly capturing the popular imagination, and is being very widely -
if not always wisely - discussed.

As I understand it, my mission this morning is to make clear some of the
characteristics of automation - \"the nature of the beast.\" If I am not
mistaken, during the next 2 weeks of hearings you will receive a great
many different and conflicting definitions of automation. The most
common statement, in this respect, is that automation is merely an
extension of mechanization. If this is the case, there certainly seems
little justification for a separate new word to describe it.

I think that if the facts are looked to, if what is actually happening
at the present time is analyzed, it is possible to come up with a
particular set of changes that are occuring in industry and in business
that perhaps justify the use of a new word to describe them. It seems to
me this more than simply the introduction of new kinds of hardware, or a
particular kind of technology. It is a basic change in production
philosophy.

Our orginal and traditional attitude toward the organization of
industrial processes has been to organize our industry according to a
division of labor. When we first organized factories and businesses, we
found it necessary to break down our work, to allow for a division of
labor according to specific human skills. Later, as we mechanized our
activities, and introduced machines into factories, we followed the same
breakdown, the same division of labor, and we mechanized around that
division of labor. We introduced machines in specific departs of plants
and into sections of plants to do activities that were organized
orginally according to the devision of labor. Now, through automation -
and I think this is perhaps the basic meaning of automation - we are
beginning to look at our industrial processes as complete, integrated
systems, from the introduction of the raw material until the completion
of the final product. It seems to me this is basically a change in
production philosophy. It is something analogous to Henry Ford\'s
concept of the assembly line. It is a way of looking at, as much as it
is a way of doing, a technology.

One way of defining automation is to say that it is a means of
organizing or controlling production processes to achieve optimum use of
all production resources - mechanical, material, and human.

There are two basic steps that industry follows in the approach toward
automation. The first of these is the organization of each of the
several steps of the production process into a fully integrated system.
The oil refineries pioneered in this step; the chemical industry,
processing industries, and nuclear production have since followed in
going through this first step of automation. They have changed what had
formerly been batch processes into integrated systems.

The second step of automation is to take the system and to control I
think there has been a great deal of confusion upon this point, and you
may very well see this reflected in some of the statements during the
course of the hearings. People who are not familiar with the process
industries will point to oil refineries and say: \"This is automation.
Other industries are going to develop in the same way.\" Actually, by
the introduction of control systems into oil refineries and other
processing industries - paper manufacturing, sugar refining, chemical
manufacture, etc. - a second stage of automation is being achieved. Here
it is not a case of replacing hand labor by machines, but rather of
operating the machines at optimum efficiency all of the time.

I think it is possible to characterize the nature of automation by three
simple statements: First, the concept of automation is very simple. It
is a welding together, as I have said, of the production steps. It is
looking at production processes as closed and integrated systems.
Secondly, the technology of automation is incredibly complex. It is
easily among the half dozen most advanced technologies of our time.
Fundamentally, it deals with the transmission and use of information for
the purposes of machine control, and for the purposes of optimizing
production. I think you may be interested in the origin of this
technology. The individual use of self-regulating mechanisms - devices
that can regulate the course of their own activity - is very old. It
goes back to the float-controlled valves the Romans used, and devices
used by the early Dutch to keep windmills facing into the wind. James
Watt devised a regulator, the \"flyball governor,\" to keep his steam
engine operating at constant speed, and there have been a number of
other uses of this concept of self-regulation, which is known as
feedback.

During World War II, the theory and use of feedback was studied in great
detail by a number of scientists in this country and in England. The
introduction of rapidly moving aircraft very quickly made traditional
gun-laying techniques of anti-aircraft warfare obsolte. It was
impossible to follow such rapidly moving targets manually. As a result,
a large part of the scientific manpower in this country was directed
toward the development of self-regulating devicesand systems to control
our military equipment. It is out of this work that the technology of
automation, as we understand it today, has developed. During the last 10
years, this technology has begun to be applied to industry. Yet it is
not so much the technology itself, but rather the way it is applied,
that is properly called automation.

I think th third point about automation that may help to give an
understanding of its nature is that its application is very widespread.
Automation can be applied in many types of of businesses and industries.
If automation is regarded as a philosophy, a way of organizing
production, it is something that can be applied in areas where only a
small amount of actual mechanization is possible. It seems to me that a
good example which will clarify this point is the automation of office
procedure. We have developed, through the use of new technology, the
machines you mentioned in your introduction: computing machines and
data-processing equipment. Through the use of this equipment it is
possible to automate office operations which hitherto have been
conducted entirely by hand.

In the factory, automation means basically two things: It means, first
of all, the integration of production machines, which may which may in
fact be no more than a new level of mechanization. An often-cited
example is the Ford plant in Cleveland, where injection blocks are made
quite automatically by the use of a series of special-purpose machines -
an automatic mass-production line.

Most of American industry, however, depends upon short runs of product.
About 89 to 90 percent of all American production is in lots of less
than 25 individual pieces. It is impossible to build special-purpose
machines to manufacture these, because the character of the product
changes too frequently. This is where the second meaning of factory
automation comes in. In such a job-shop operation automation is just
beginning to be achieved, in the form of tape-controlled machines tools
-- machines for which instructions can be provided in a flexible and
variable form. This kind of automation is just beginning to have an
impact. It gives every impression of taking a very loong time to come
about.

All of these facts about the nature of automation -- and I am sure you
will hear many more during the next few weeks -- are different aspects of
what is basically a single new philosophy, and a single new technology.

Walter S. Buckingham: Associate Professor of Economics, Georgia Institute of Technology
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since World War II some spectacular discoveries in the fields of
electronics and communications have permitted the manufacture of various
types of automatic computing machinery. These machines are capable of
translating a large body of previously developed, theoretical, economic,
and business principles into practical significance. Called electronic
computers, they are capable of processing data with almost unbelievable
speed. When information is fed into them, usually on tapes, they can
perform a series of logical operations can can choose among several
previously anticipated courses of action based on built-in criteria.
They can even adjust automatically for errors. The operation of these
computers to solve scientific or commerical problems is often referred
to as automation.

Also, in the last few years of a number of automatic or semiautomatic
machines have been constructed to supplement convential assembly-line
operations in factories. These machines perform hundreds of individual
mechnical functions without direct human intervention. The operation of
these machines is likewise commonly called automation.

Finally, sceintists, computer manufacturers, and science fiction writers
have shown, hypothetically at least, how the administrative and
manufacturing processes of an enterprise could be integrated into a
single, silent, automatic monster which could grind out an endless chain
of products without a man in sight. This awesome picture has charged the
imagination of some and struck terror into the hearts of others. The
possibility of such developments is also called automation.

In addition to this definitional confusion many speculations,
hypotheses, and fragments of theories concerning the broad economic and
social implications of automation are currently being expounded. In this
flood of verbiage there is no\* shortage of imagination, but there is a
notable lack of the Kind of critical thought and careful documenta tion
which yields quantitative, scientifically accurate results. There is a
great need to collect, sift, classify, and evaluate the empirical
evidence which alone can test these generalizations...

The variety of popular uses of the term \"automation\" necessitates some
definition which is both precise and relevant for analysis. Such a
definition can best be derived from an examination of the major
principles which underlie most if not all of the popular concepts of
automation. These are four such major principles - mechanization,
feedback, continuous process, and rationalization.

Mechanization means the use of machines to perform work. Some times
mechanization substitutes machinery for human or animal muscle. The
steam engine did this. Sometimes mechanization sub stitutes machinery
for brainwork at the lower, routine levels. The electronic computer does
this. Because of the power, compactness or speed of machine operation,
mechanization usually permits tasks to be performed which could never be
done by human labor alone no matter how much labor was used or how well
the enterprise was organized and managed. Mechanization increases wealth
and re duces drudgery in the long run but in the short run it may cause
hardships to workers whose skills are rendered obsolete, diluted by a
further specialization or whose jobs are abolished altogether.

Feedback is the second principle inherent in automation. This is a
concept of control whereby the input of machines is regulated by the
machine\'s own output so that the output meets the conditions of a
predetermined objective. As in a simple, thermostatically con trolled
heating system, the conditions created by the output auto matically
control, in turn, the amount of input and hence the per formance of the
machine. When controlled by the feedback prin ciple, machines start and
stop themselves and regulate quality and quantity of output
automatically.

Continuous flow or process is the third principle of automation. This
concept is of increasing importance because it is spreading from many
individual production processes to the business enterprise itself and on
to the entire economy. Mass production, increasing interdependence and
now automation all embody this principle which is leading to a concept
of the business enterprise as an endless process. Business for the most
part has ceased being an operation that can be started and stopped with
small loss. The regulation of a constant flow of goods has become a
major concern of management...

Rationalization, the fourth principle of automation, means the
application of reason to the solution of problems or to the search for
knowledge. In a production system it means that the entire process from
the raw material to the final product is carefully analyzed so that
every oper ation can be designed to contribute in the most efficient way
to the achievement of clearly enunciated goals of the enterprise.

Actually, rationalistic philosophy is nothing new, having become an
important force in the world with the Renaissance. However, the
scientific, rationalist philosophy takes on numerous new implications
when it can be implemented by modern electronic machinery. The rise of
electronic computers has led to a fascination with the possibil ity that
superrationalism in the business and scientific spheres might spill over
and transform society into an exact mechanism in which all e ements of
chance, risk, capriciousness and free will, as well as all spiritual
values, would be eliminated. Although this kind of s ecu lation is
highly dubious nevertheless it is one logical extension oi this fourth
principle of automation.

Following these four principles - mechanization, feedback, continuous
process and rationalization - automation can be given a definition
precise enough to be useful for logical analysis. It can be said to be
any continuous and integrated operation of a rationalized production
system which uses electronic or other equipment to regulate and
coordinate the quality and quantity of production.

D.J. Davis: Vice President, Manufacturing, Ford Motor Company
-------------------------------------------------------------

\[Davis begins with a concise history of changes in production technique
at Ford since its founding, including the debut of the assembly line.\]

To emphasize that automation, as we consider not new, con sider the
well-publicized flour mill that was conceived and built back in 1807,
almost 150 years ago. In this flour mill the grain was dumped into
hopper that led to scale, where was weighed and dumped again into
another hopper that had a screw-type conveyor at the bottom. This
conveyor carried the grain to bucket elevator, which raised to the top
floor. From the top floor flowed by gravity to another screw conveyor
that carried to hoppers feeding the mill stones. As the flour emerged
was fed mechanically to screens, then into barrels, and finally carried
away by wagon or barge. This was true automation, whether the designer
of that mill knew or not.

At Ford we have defined automation as \"the automatic handling of parts
between progressive production processes.\" It the result of nothing
more than better planning, improved tooling, and the application of more
efficient manufacturing methods which take full advantage of the
progress made by the machine-tool and equipment industries.

As used at Ford, automation covers a wide variety of material-handling
and related devices. In the machining of engine cylinder blocks, for
example, automation moves the parts being manufactured into and out of
load and unload stations automatically and, at the same time, actuates
the machine cycle through electrical interlocking. When it can be
applied, automation also is used to index the part, position turn or
rotate depending upon the requirements of the succeeding operations.

\[Davis then describes the use of electrical interlocks at Ford.\]

Robert W. Burgess: Director, Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

I think we can say that \"automation\" is a new word for a now familiar
process of expanding the types of work in which machinery is used to do
tasks faster, or better, or in greater quantity.

Walter P. Reuther, President, Congress of Industrial Organizations
------------------------------------------------------------------

There has been a great deal of propaganda. Even the Secretary of
Commerce has misrepresented the position of American labor with respect
to automation.... We welcome any step forward that will make it possible
for mankind to create greater economic wealth, with less human effort...

The other day, I am told, one of the vice presidents of the Ford Motor
Co. came before your committee. I think he gave you a lot of very
valuable information, but I take issue with one conclusion that- he left
with your committee when he said that automation is just an extension of
the normal technological evolutionary process. I believe that is an
understatement of what automation is. Automation is the second phase of
the industrial revolution.

James Watt, when he developed the first simple and crude steam- powered
machine, which was used in the textile industries of England, made the
first step toward the substitution of mechanical power for human power -
mechanical muscles replaced human muscles. We took that simple beginning
and we developed our mass-production economy. But automation is not just
an extension of that technological process. Automation makes a
completely new development in the technological process because
automation, in addition to substituting mechanical power for human
power, begins to substitute mechanical judgment for human judgment - the
machine begins to substitute for the thinking process on a mechanical
basis for the thinking process which heretofore was done exclusively by
the human mind.

The machine has a memory in which you can store all sorts of complex
information. With specific impulses you can bring that information out
of the memory and with it begin to instruct the machine to do very
complicated tasks.

This is why automation is not a normal extension of the technological
process which was initiated at the beginning of the industrial
revolution, but marks a second phase of the indusrial revolution.

It means that because the machine now cannot only replace human power,
but can replace human judgements, its impact will be much greater than
the impact of the first phase of the industrial revolution.

Don G. Mitchell: Chairman and President, Sylvania Electric Products, Inc.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Automation is only a more recent term for mechanization which has been
going on since the industrial revolution began...

Automation comes in bits and pieces. First the automating of a single
process, and then gradually a tying together of several processes to get
a group or subassembly complete.

Robert C. Tait: President, Stromberg-Calrson Company; Senior Vice President, General Dynamics Corporation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In my own view, automation is simply a phrase coined, I believe, by Del
Harder of Ford Motor Co. in describing their recent supermechanization
which represents an extension of technological progress beyond what has
formerly been know as mechanization.

Some experts in this field limit the application of automation to
control devices that involve what is known as feedback - that system of
machines and controls that capable of adjusting its own operation in the
direction needed to obtain desired result, rather than simply following
preset cycle of operations. One of the earliest applications of the
feedback principle James Watt\'s flyball governor for steam engines.
Other similar long-standing applications are windmills, ship-steering
engines, thermostats, and so forth. Thus the feedback principle in
itself nothing new but the modern application new in that the feedback
information handled by electronic means.

Howard Coughlin: President, Office Employees\' International Union, AFL
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Automation in the office consists of the development of general and
special purpose computing machines capable of recording and storing
information, and of perfomring both simple and complex mathematical
operations on such information. It is apparent that in the long run,
automation will be of benefit to all of us. However, through the
development of automation, dislocations of personnel will occur which
will present many problems to be resolved.

James B. Carey: Secretary-Treasurer, CIO; President, International Union of Electrical Workers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When I speak of automation, I am referring to the use of mechanical and
electronic devices, rather than human workers, to regulate and control
the operation of machines. In that sense, automation represents
something radically different from the mere extension of mechanization.
Of course, it is not a sudden, full-blown appearance. It rests upon
previous developments, especially upon Government- sponsored research
and development in electronics and radar. But it is a new departure from
the older methods of machine production by machine operators, since it
represents the automatic operation of machines and of entire industrial
and clerical processes.

The first industrial revolution, usually identified with Watt's steam
engine, replaced animal and human muscle power with steam power and
electric power; it replaced the handicraft worker with the machine
tender or machine operator. Automation uses control devices that result
in the automatic production and processing of goods and data; it tends
to replace the human regulation and control of machines and thereby
changes the machine operator into a supervisor of an automatically
controlled operating system.

Automation is a new technology, arising from electronics and elec¬
trical engineering. It is not a new machine, or even a new industry. It
is rather, a new and revolutionary technology that is applicable to
almost all, if not all, types of industrial and clerical operations. It
makes possible the automatic office, as well, as the automatic factory.
There is a likelihood that entire departments, offices, and plants, in
the major parts of the economy will be using automation equipment within
the coming 10 years.

William W. Barton: President, W. F. & John Barnes Company
---------------------------------------------------------

Personally, I prefer to think of automation in the larger sense - as an
innovation created by man to increase his production; technocracy, if
you will.

In a broad sense, it can be stated that any feat that hands and body can
perform can be duplicated automatically, given enough time and money.

James P. Mitchell: Secretary of Labor
-------------------------------------

Taking the first aspect of the word, we find that in some ways
automation means precisely what each individual man on the street thinks
it means, for to a great extent it is a word which produces various
sorts of fears in various sorts of individuals---fear of change, fear of
technology itself, fear of displacement, fear of unemployment, fear of
machines, fear of science in general. In this sense, automation is
nothing new, since these same fears have been with us in one form or
another ever since the first caveman resented fire.

I am reminded, in fact, of the hearings held by the House Labor
Committee less than 20 years ago. The discussion centered around a
resolution that would have required the Secretary of Labor to draw up a
list of laborsaving devices and a parallel estimate of the number of
people probably unemployed as a result of their use.

So the present discussion is not within an unfamiliar context.

Taking the second aspect of the word, the technical one, we find that in
a general way the word represents technological change, which surely is
nothing new. It represents a movement certainly as old as the industrial
revolution and probably older. Now, technological change varies, as we
all know, in rate and degree. Its latest manifestation, coming as it has
in a favorable setting of growth and prosperity, has appeared with
relative swiftness and in some ways spectacularly.

It has come with such devices as complex automatic systems, electronic
controls and regulators, feedback systems, transfer machines, conveyors,
and the like. It has been attached to many self-regulating processes
which have reduced the number of workers needed to perform a given job.
When you get down to specifics there is some argument about the precise
definition of this second aspect of the word. However, we can all agree
that it is the latest development in the progress of industrial
technology, the latest step in the long search for ways to replace human
energy with mechanical energy.

Joseph A. Beirne: President, Communications Workers of America
--------------------------------------------------------------

We in the telephone industry have lived with mechanization and its
successor automation for many years. They have been accompanied by fear
and job insecurity. They have been our constant companions and loom
larger today than ever before.

\[Throughout the remainder of his testimony, Beirne favors the term
\"mechanization\".\]

Cledo Brunetti: Director, Engineering Research and Development, General Mills, Inc.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

First, I want to point out that automation is not a revolutionary
technique, but a continuation of our progress in mechanization...

Automation, a newly coined word, to describe an old, old process, has
created in some minds the impression that this is not a process of
natural growth. This \"newness\" interpretation of the word is
confusing, because the word seems to set end limits on a continuous
growth process. Automation cannot be said to have begun on any certain
date, nor can it be said that it will end at any definite time.
Automation is in truth but a phase df our continuing technological
advance. It is just more of the kind of stuff which has been taking work
out of work, and creating more and better jobs all the time.

Gentlemen, we had automation in this country in 1784. This book, which I
hold here, by Oliver Evans, was published in 1795, and it describes an
automatic flour-milling plant which was built near Philadelphia at that
time...

But automation, in effect, had its start in the days of the Neanderthal
man, when that early ancestor learned that the animals of the forest
could be subdued more effectively with a club than with his hands. As a
matter of fact, he even used it for communication in convincing his wife
what to do.

The point is that the desire to lessen work, to do things more quickly,
effectively, and easily, came into physical being as the wheel in that
time. Man invented the wheel way back in those days and the wheel was
the basis for the machine.

Ultimately then man learned to make combinations of wheels and shafts
and other parts into machines capable of even more complex operation. To
the machine was added cheaper, more efficient, more abundant power.

Then came programing \[sic\], which was telling the machine what to do.
Such as using a switch to turn it on and off, but more complicated
programing. Finally, control, to check the quality and quantity of
machine output. Put them all together --- machine, power, programing and
control --- and you have a definition of automation in four words, which
gives you also the history of automation.

Marshall G. Munce: Vice President, York Corporation
---------------------------------------------------

Automation is a new word, and to many people it has become a scare word.
Yet it is not essentially different from the process of improving
methods of production which has been going on throughout human
history---ever since men first took up jagged pieces of flint to perform
operations better than they could be performed with bare hands. Since
mankind learned to think, people have sought to amplify their efforts
and produce more for their needs by using tools instead of muscles...

What is considered by some to be new in mechanization today, and the
reason this hearing has been called, is the development of ingenious
control mechanisms, such as the electric eye, mechanical brains, and
other intricate electronic and radiation devices, which can direct and
control the operation of machines.

The production engineer has at his disposal a variety of machines and
devices for controlling them which, when put together in proper
sequence, can turn out a continuous flow of mass-produced products or
materials without human hands touching them during the manufacturing
process.

This is \"automation,\" and to some people it calls up a specter of
robot, workerless factories, and great numbers of people deprived of
their jobs and their means of livelihood.

Yet these control devices are not new. Automation is not a subject which
can be discussed only in the future tense. Its essential features have
been applied in a number of iields for many years. It is the word that
is new, not the principles involved.

Modern petroleum refineries fit very closely the definition of the
\"automatic factory,\" which is regarded as the ultimate in automation.
The substances to be treated in the refinery flow continuously through
the several processes, controlled automatically by regulating devices.
Human labor is used only for maintenance and for control at a few
critical points. Oil refining has been on this continuous-flow basis for
over 30 years.

Automatic manufacture has been highly developed for some time in a
number of other processing industries. The continuous-flow technique has
become the standard method of producing certain chemicals, some kinds of
food, paper, and for the refining of ores. The production of cigarettes
is an almost wholly automatic process.

The dial system of routing telephone calls is an example of automation
which has been with us for some time. The New York Telephone Co. began
installation of dial telephones in 1922.

Even in retailing, automation has a long history. Vending machines for
selling various forms of merchandise date back as far as most of us can
remember. So far such devices have never captured more than a small
fringe of total retail trade. Whether automatic selling will become more
prevalent in the future I would not venture to predict, but if it does,
it will not be a brand new development.

Ralph J. Cordiner: President, General Electric Company
------------------------------------------------------

For practical purposes in planning manufacturing facilities, General
Electric defines automation as \"continuous automatic production,\"
largely in the sense of linking together already highly mechanized
individual operations. Automation is a way of work based on the concept
of production as a continuous flow, rather than processing by
intermittent batches of work.

There are those who try to make automation a catchall term to apply to
every improvement, whether new or thoroughly familiar, that occurs in a
factory or office. It is important to recognize that automation is only
one phase in the process of technological progress, a natural
evolutionary step in man's continuing effort to use the discoveries of
science in getting the world's work done...

Thus, in the factory and in the office, you could say that progress
toward greater automation is nothing new; only the expression
\"automation\" is new.

Technological change in industry is a gradual process. Most products are
first made by hand, or with hand tools. Then industry mechanizes : It
introduces machines for some parts of the process, although many hand
operations usually remain. As the economics of the situation warrant,
the machines are made more and more automatic. Finally, where we can do
it technically and where economic considerations warrant the
investment, we link together parts of the process to achieve more
continuous and automatic operation. As industry moves its operations up
this scale toward automation, there is a greater demand for more highly
trained people to handle the larger responsibilities.

Most of industry is still in the lower mechanization stage. There are
literally millions of hand operations in manufacturing today. Highly
skilled machinists, for example, usually spend much of their time and
effort placing material in machines, and removing the material. Only
part of their time is used as skilled machinists. There are many other
wasteful and burdensome hand operations that add to the ultimate cost of
goods going to the consumer...

Thomas J. Walsh: Chemical Group Director, Automation Project; Professor, Chemical Engineering, Case Institute of Technology
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The tendency of material such as fluids to flow means that they can be
handled in pipes in a continuous process. This continuous operation is
the chemical plant equivalent of what I believe automation amounts to in
the mechanical-process industry.

Ralph E. Cross: Executive Vice President, The Cross Company
-----------------------------------------------------------

To begin, I think I would like to start out as most witnesses do, I
presume, by giving a definition of automation. I like to think of
automation as being the application of cost-reducing machines and
techniques. I would like to put some emphasis on the words
\"cost-reducing\" and distinguish it from labor-saving, which I will get
into later...

Automation in the metalworking industry has been in existence for over
100 years. It actually goes back to the time when the first basic
machine tools were invented...

The difficulty with these machines is that they simply do not reduce
production costs. The secret of bringing a machine like this into
existence, or any other, for that matter, is getting the proper balance
between mechanization and labor. Every time a new machine is purchased a
decision must be made between more mechanization and less labor, on the
one hand, and less mechanization and more labor, on the other...

So the objective is not to reduce labor, but to get the proper balance
between mechanization and labor, so that we will get the lowest possible
part cost.

In all of my experience in creating automated machines, I don't believe
I have ever sold a machine that could not have been made more automatic,
or that might not have reduced labor further than it did. I think I can
sum it up by saying that I have never found a situation to exist where
all mechanization and no labor would provide the lowest operating cost.
I think that sort of a situation is as extreme as a situation with all
labor and no mechanization.

Clifton W. Phalen: President, Michigan Bell Telephone Company
-------------------------------------------------------------

As the subcommittee pointed out last April in its release announcing its
study, \"automation\" is a relatively new word. It is variously defined.
To me it means general technological progress of the kind that has been
taking place in our industry and in others for many years. It is in this
broad sense that I would prefer to use the word.

Automation, however, apparently suggests to some people that factories
and even some industries of the future will run automatically, with only
a few persons needed to control operations.

S.R. Hursh: Chief Engineer, Pennsylvania Railroad Company
---------------------------------------------------------

Your witness today is at a loss to describe automation in the true sense
of the word. The only real automation to my mind is the human heartbeat
which is not subject to conscious control of man. Automation, therefore,
is nothing more than controlled mechanization whether that control be
electronic or mechanical.

The word \"automation\" is a comparatively new word. It has in a short
period of time become a new science that is having a great effect in
many industries especially those that lend themselves to automatic
control like the chemical and oil industries and the utilities, such as
light and power companies.

It is, however, not new to the railroad industry, especially in the
field of railway signaling. For years we in the railroad industry and
the manufacturers of signaling devices have thought of it as system
control engineering and it dates back to the inception or invention of
the track circuit as early as 1872. Since that time, steady growth and
development of signaling equipment by close collaboration between the
railway industry and the makers of signaling equipment, such as Union
Switch and Signal, Division of Westingnouse Air Brake Co., and General
Railway Signal, there has been developed the following: Centralized
traffic control, automatic train control, continuous cab signaling,
route interlocking, automatic freight car classification; the latter, of
which, I will touch on in detail, by an explanation of what the
Pennsylvania Railroad is now constructing at Conway, Pennsylvania...

Dr. A. V. Astin: Director, National Bureau of Standards
-------------------------------------------------------

Automation is a relatively new word. It has been defined in many ways by
various people. It probably means, the process of rendering automatic.
From this point of view, the newest thing about automation is the word
itself. The development of devices to perform functions automatically is
a very old activity. For example, the ancient Romans invented a
hydraulic float valve to control automatically the level of water in
storage tanks. I would prefer to consider the subject of mechanization
which is a broader area of technology, with automation as one of its
important subdivisions. The general goal of mechanization is increased
productivity; to use machines to aid man in producing more goods and
services. Increased mechanization and increased productivity have
expanded together. This has been especially noteworthy over the past 150
years, and particularly in the past 50 years.

\[The \"phases of automation\" are described as follows.\]

The first and probably the most basic is the replacement of physical
energy provided by humans or animals by energy provided by machines
powered from mechanical, electrical, or chemical sources. A primitive
example is the use of hydraulic energy to operate a flour mill. More
recent examples are the use of gasoline to propel automobiles and
tractors and electrical energy to turn, the wheels of factories. The
importance of this phase of mechanization is attested by the tremendous
expansion of electrical and petroleum energy sources in recent decades.
Even more phenomenal expansion can be expected as atomic-energy sources
become available.

A second phase of mechanization is the use of physical measurement. In
the older days of hand craftsmanship, items were fabricated by fitting
mating parts together or by adjusting an item, such as garment, to the
individual size of the user. With the development of the science of
measurement, together with instruments for making measurements, it
became possible to fabricate items according to a specification. When
items are fabricated according to physicaf characteristics, as defined
on a blueprint or specification, they can be used interchangeably.
Deyelopments along these Iines led to mass production techniques, the
essence of which is interchangeability of parts. One of the first
persons to demonstrate this technique was Eli Whitney, who showed
approximately 150 years ago that rifles could be assembled from
interchangeable parts, each one of which was fabricated in accordance
with carefully prescribed procedures of measurement. More recent
advances in the science or physical measurement have brought about
instruments that make certain measurements automatically, as well as
instruments which make measurements more precisely.

A third phase in mechanization is the use of mechanical handling
techniques whereby materials are carried by machine from one processing
station to another. The conveyor belt is probably the best known example
of this phase of mechanization.

A fourth phase of mechanization involves the concept of feedback.
Feedback merely means the use of the result of a physical measurement at
one stage of a mechanical process to alter or control an operation at in
earlier stage of the process. A commonly used example of feedback is the
thermostat on an automatic furnace. The thermostat measures the
temperature at a particular location and feeds the result of this
measurement to the controls of the furnace, shuttingit off or turning it
on according to the temperature observation. Feedback can be
accomplished entirely mechanically or with the intervention of human
operators in varying degrees.

In the furnace example, a man can be both the temperature-measuring
device and the feedback element; he shovels coal or closes the furnace
drafts, depending on whether he is cold or hot. In steel production, it
is customary to run analyses on the composition of the melts at various
steps along the processing line. A human operator may make the
measurements with mechanical instruments which can result in an orally
conveyed order to modify a phase of the production process as a result
of the measurement. In modern petroleum refining, the measuring process,
the order giving, and the resulting control modification can all be
accomplished mechanically.

A fifth and most recent phase of mechanization is the utilization of
advanced and automatic computational techniques. Frequently the
completion of the feedback process requires computations of varying
degrees of complexity on the results of a physical measurement before a
proper control order can be determined. Automatic machines which make
possible rapid and reliable computations provide extremely important
supplements to the feedback process. It is in this area that the
striking recent advances have taken place, providing a basis for
extensive future developments. Advances in the tools of computation have
another important implication. Hitherto the trend in mechanization has
been confined primarily to the processing of physical materials and
devices. Automatic, computing machines are, on the other hand, concerned
with processing numbers. The processing of numbers is an important
operation in many activities other than production lines. Business
offices such as banks, insurance companies, and retailing organizations,
Government agencies, and scientific laooratories, are all concerned with
processing numbers on increasingly larger scales. Hence, this phase of
the process of mechanization appears to have applications in many areas
other than the production processes where so much mechanization has
already taken place.

I mentioned earlier that the goal of mechanization is increased
productivity, and increased productivity is, I believe, an objective of
primary concern to our Nation.

M. A. Hollengreen: President, National Machine Tool Builders\' Association
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Actually, machine-tool engineers do not talk about automation. They have
been building automatic devices into machine tools for 50 years. They
naturally take pride in their most recent accomplishments, but they
expected them. They do not regard automation as something entirely new
and unforeseen.

I think I can make this point clearer by telling you about metalcutting
lathes. Back in the days after the Civil War when lathes were first
developed, the operator had to put the workpiece in and take it out by
hand in order to make a single outside cut. Then a turret lathe was
developed on which two or more cuts, both internal and external, could
be made without removing the workpiece from the machine.

Next, the industry developed lathes with more than one spindle. It
devised means for moving the workpiece automatically from position to
position in the machine, and from spindle to spindle. This was what is
called the automatic chucking machine. By the 1920\'s it was possible to
perform 10 or 15 operations on such a machine without moving the work by
hand.

Little by little, electric and automatic controls were added to chucking
machines so that by World War II there were hundreds of these machines
turning out thousands of identical parts a day. Then the word
\"automation\" was coined, sometime just before Korea.

Since we first heard of automation there have been further improvements
in chucking machines. They consist mainly in devices for automatic
gaging which enable the machine to correct its own errors. But, largely,
they represent continuations of previous developments.

Chucking machines involve a great deal of automation, but it is not what
has been referred to as Detroit-type automation. To the machine-tool
builder this means merely a transfer machine. In such a machine a raw
piece is loaded at one station and held in place for the first
operation. It then moves automatically to a second station where a
second operation is performed. This process can be repeated through many
stations. Transfer machines have been built as long as football fields.

Before these \[transfer machine\] installations \[for production of
automobile engine valves\] were developed, the pieces had to be loaded
and moved from operation to operation by hand. This took time, several
minutes per piece, and over long production runs these minutes add up to
hours and days and months. Before this kind of installation was
available, a maximum of 275 valves could be ground in an hour. We can
now manufacture 450 in an hour. In addition, human errors have been
eliminated. We achieve much greater accuracy. Scrap has been reduced to
a minimum.

Dr. Vannevar Bush: President, Carnegie Institution of Washington; Founder of Raytheon; Wartime head of Office of Scientific Research and Development
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Automation may be defined as relegation to a machine of the function of
performing operations previously performed, manually. Any operations
which are repetitive in nature, and which may be specified by a formula
or a schedule, may be thus turned over to be performed by a group of
interconnected devices - mechanical, electrical, pneumatic, and the
like. It is an entirely different question whether it will pay, or
whether it is socially desirable, for work thus to be transferred.

Even mental work may be thus relegated to a machine, if it comes within
a similar definition, as has been well illustrated by Dr. Burgess. It is
being done to great advantage today. This is not usually called
automation, but it is of equal importance to the automation which
substitutes for manual work. In fact, in the long run it may be of even
greater importance to our progress, for it enables us to know more and
to know it more accurately.

But automation may be thought of in a much broader sense. Man now has
the dream of making machines which are like himself, and which can hence
become his slaves. And he has progressed a long distance toward this
objective, and will progress further. Yet there are inherent limits, and
severe conditions to be met, as the evolution of machines proceeds under
man\'s direction.

The functions of the human mechanism for which he would find substitutes
are primarily physical and mental; he would replace manual operations
and the mental processes that go with them. He is not much concerned
with one property of living organisms, the ability to take in food and
convert it into energy. In fact, he assigns this function to a separate
category of machines, his engines; for food he uses coal and oil, and
thus he produces power to drive his automobile or electricity to run his
factory. He will no doubt use atomic and solar energy for the same
purpose. In fact, he is doing so well at this that he has more
convenient and powerful means than nature has introduced. And when he
builds a machine to replace a man he has little worry about its
metabolism, for he can readily supply the energy needs.

For doing mechanical things he has a host of devices: Motors, relays,
hydraulic cylinders, pneumatic devices. With these he can accomplish
movements at far greater speed than can a man's arms or legs; he can
exert far more powerful forces; and he can perform the movements far
more precisely and reliably. His machines never tire of their work. Thus
even although he has never produced the marvelous physical structure and
chemistry of the human muscle, he has many, and in some ways, better
substitutes.

When the operation to be performed is strictly repetitive, and no real
thinking is involved, the substitution of a machine for a man is
straightforward. One merely has to reproduce the mechanical movements
involved. But it is possible to go beyond this. Feedback may be
introduced, and the machine thus caused to exercise a sort of judgment.
Mr. Reuther has given a good example of this in the form of a lathe
which notes the variations of its product and readjusts its tools
accordingly. And for this purpose we nave many remarkable instruments ;
photocells which can sense the exact position of elements, radioactive
devices which can instantly sense the thickness of a sheet of metal,
gages to which the thickness of a hair is a gross error, and a host of
others. Thus he can make his machines self-regulating and
self-correcting.

The performance of the machine need not be fixed once for all, it can be
to a certain extent flexible, and the instructions given to it may be
altered, and may be very complex. Thus a milling machine may be
controlled by a magnetic tape and caused to perform any sequence of
operations that such a machine is capable of, time after time, without
error and with precision. And by merely altering the tape a\* wholly new
sequence or operations may lie introduced. We hardly approach the
versatility of the human mechanism in this way, for the same man can
ride a bicycle, drive a car, swim a river, or add a column of figures.
We could make versatile machines, no doubt, that would do many things.
But here, in particular, one meets the difference between what it is
possible to do, and what it pays to do.

Machines may be made to cooperate so that the performance of one is
correlated with the work of the others. In particular it is possible to
arrange a line of machines to perform a sequence of operations, passing
work on from one to the next. We here encounter what is usually called
systems engineering in one of its phases.

It is in the mental area that the most fascinating progress is now
occurring. When a man sits down to solve a mathematical problem a very
large part of what he does, not all, is repetitive and carried out in
accordance with fixed formulas. When he manipulates a mass of
statistics, fills out forms, draws curves of relationships, prepares
statements of inventory, earnings, and the like, a large traction of his
work is simply the routine application of fixed rules. All of this can
be done for him by machine, much faster and more accurately than he can
do it himself. It is being done, largely by digital machines, with great
memories, high precision, and enormous speed. The results of such
calculations can sometimes be used directly to control his machines. But
more often they simply present partial results for his judgment. A
machine can even calculate the progress of an election, and present
interesting trends. But it cannot predict the result, unless told what
rules to use in so doing, and, as we know from experience, the human
instructions in that regard may be faulty. The human brain is a
marvelous mechanism. Machines can excel it in precision of memory and
operations, and in speed. But they by no means match its extraordinary
complexity and flexibility. And, in my opinion, they never will, at
least within our lifetimes. From Vice President Davis, of the Ford Motor
Co. on the first day to Dr. Bush, a scientist and engineer of
extraordinary experience, academic, industrial, and governmental, this
morning you have had traced for you the story of automation as
mechanization. From this aspect it consists in a large and growing array
of mechanical and electronic devices that give producers new machines
for doing new things or old things better and equipping old machines
with new gadgets. The essential feature of this new step in
mechanization is the application of electronics to the control of
mechanical and chemical processes. The mechanical brain or electronic
computer is the central feature of this development, and the practical
result is the substitution of mechanical for manual controls at many
points in the physical process of production. As has repeatedly been
pointed out, these mechanical controls also make it possible to do
things we could not do at all by manual methods, notably the production
of atomic power.

In a very able and illuminating paper in the opening session of these
hearings, professor Buckingham, of the Georgia Institute of Technology,
differentiated four phases of what is labeled \"automation\"; namely,
mechanization, feedback, continuous process, and rationalization. I am
somewhat bothered by having \"continuous process\" put third in this
sequence instead of second, because continuous process as been a part of
the story of mechanization from early flour-milling through meatpacking
to the automobile assembly line, where gravity, or steam, or electric
power gave continuity but where manual controls were still heavily
relied on.

The real change came when we passed from this kind of continuous-process
mechanization to that in which electronic devices make it possible to
dispense to considerable extent with the mental element in manual
control and to use the feedback principle extensively. Under this
principle, electronic mechanisms make it possible to conduct more
elaborate, more economical, and more precise continuous-production
operations because the outcome of the process controls the process
itself, starting, altering, or stopping it so as to make it produce a
desired result. This should dispose of the cliche that automation is
nothing new, just more mechanization. It has its roots in mechanization,
to be sure, but something new was added when electronic devices made
possible the widespread application of the feedback principle.

The three earlier phases of industrialism, mechanization, continuous
process, and rationalization, all continue but have been given a new
dimension. When we introduce this word "rationalization" we pass over
from the primarily technological to the primarily economic meanings of
automation, though, of course the two are interrelated. Though Professor
Buckingham included this area of discussion in his outline statement he
did not develop it very far. I am therefore taking up where he left off.
He said:

> Rationalization in a production system means that the entire process
from the raw material to the finished product is carefully analyzed so
that every operation can be designed to contribute in the most efficient
way to the achievement of clearly enunciated goals of the enterprise \*
\* \* The scientific, rationalist philosophy takes on numerous new
implications when it can be implemented by modern electronic machinery.

In this aspect also automation is not something altogether new. It is
essentially a continuation of the scientific management movement which
took shape about 50 years ago. Indeed that movement toward
cost-reduction or efficiency increase was even then often called
rationalization, particularly in European comment. It gave rise to much
agitation about technological unemployment, and to the cult of
technocracy in the period between World War I and World War II. It led
also to the movement toward economic and social planning. Whereas
scientific management was directed toward rationalization of the
operations of the individual plant or company, national economic
planning had as its goal the rationalization of the operation of the
whole economy. The point I want to make here is that this new
development of electronic computers and controls, and this enlarged
concept of continuous process makes contributions to the objectives of
national economic efficiency set out in Employment Act.

Footnotes
=========

[^1]: See Hounshell, *Ford Automates: Technology and Organization in
    Theory and Practice* (1995).

[^2]: In most cases I simply lengthened the excerpts from James R.
    Bright\'s *Automation and Management* (1958). It appears to be
    available as a pdf
    [here](http://homepages.rpiscrews.us/~simonk/pdf/bright1958.pdf).
